Here, at your lordship's service.
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.
Humbly I thank your lordship: never may
The state or fortune fall into my keeping,
Which is not owed to you!
Who, the Lord Timon? he is my very good friend, and
an honourable gentleman.
Fie, no, do not believe it; he cannot want for money.
How!
What a strange case was that! now, before the gods,
I am ashamed on't. Denied that honourable man!
there was very little honour showed in't. For my own
part, I must needs confess, I have received some
small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels
and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his;
yet, had he mistook him and sent to me, I should
ne'er have denied his occasion so many talents.
Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well:
commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very
exquisite friend.
Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared to
that lord; he's ever sending: how shall I thank
him, thinkest thou? And what has he sent now?
I know his lordship is but merry with me;
He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself
against such a good time, when I might ha' shown
myself honourable! how unluckily it happened, that I
should purchase the day before for a little part,
and undo a great deal of honoured! Servilius, now,
before the gods, I am not able to do,--the more
beast, I say:--I was sending to use Lord Timon
myself, these gentlemen can witness! but I would
not, for the wealth of Athens, I had done't now.
Commend me bountifully to his good lordship; and I
hope his honour will conceive the fairest of me,
because I have no power to be kind: and tell him
this from me, I count it one of my greatest
afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an
honourable gentleman. Good Servilius, will you
befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him?
I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed;
And he that's once denied will hardly speed.
