Nay, I'll come: if I lose a scruple of this sport,
let me be boiled to death with melancholy.
I would exult, man: you know, he brought me out o'
favour with my lady about a bear-baiting here.
O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock
of him: how he jets under his advanced plumes!
O, peace! now he's deeply in: look how
imagination blows him.
O, peace, peace!
O peace, peace, peace! now, now.
Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
Now is the woodcock near the gin.
This wins him, liver and all.
A fustian riddle!
What dish o' poison has she dressed him!
Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as
rank as a fox.
Did not I say he would work it out? the cur is
excellent at faults.
And O shall end, I hope.
Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see
more detraction at your heels than fortunes before
you.
I will not give my part of this sport for a pension
of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
Here comes my noble gull-catcher.
You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of
judgment and reason.
She did show favour to the youth in your sight only
to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to
put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.
You should then have accosted her; and with some
excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should
have banged the youth into dumbness. This was
looked for at your hand, and this was balked: the
double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash
off, and you are now sailed into the north of my
lady's opinion; where you will hang like an icicle
on a Dutchman's beard, unless you do redeem it by
some laudable attempt either of valour or policy.
There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.
This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.
We shall have a rare letter from him: but you'll
not deliver't?
And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no
great presage of cruelty.
Here he is, here he is. How is't with you, sir?
how is't with you, man?
Carry his water to the wise woman.
No way but gentleness; gently, gently: the fiend is
rough, and will not be roughly used.
If this were played upon a stage now, I could
condemn it as an improbable fiction.
Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
More matter for a May morning.
Is't so saucy?
Good, and valiant.
A good note; that keeps you from the blow of the law.
Very brief, and to exceeding good sense--less.
Good.
Still you keep o' the windy side of the law: good.
Here he comes with your niece: give them way till
he take leave, and presently after him.
I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a
mortal arbitrement; but nothing of the circumstance more.
Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by
his form, as you are like to find him in the proof
of his valour. He is, indeed, sir, the most skilful,
bloody and fatal opposite that you could possibly
have found in any part of Illyria. Will you walk
towards him? I will make your peace with him if I
can.
He is as horribly conceited of him; and pants and
looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.
Give ground, if you see him furious.
O good Sir Toby, hold! here come the officers.
A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
Come, let's see the event.
Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.
Any thing.
This is, to give a dog, and in recompense desire my
dog again.
Good madam, hear me speak,
And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wonder'd at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
Set this device against Malvolio here,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
We had conceived against him: Maria writ
The letter at Sir Toby's great importance;
In recompense whereof he hath married her.
How with a sportful malice it was follow'd,
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge;
If that the injuries be justly weigh'd
That have on both sides pass'd.
