Good words, Thersites.
No more words, Thersites; peace!
A good riddance.
Who's there? Thersites! Good Thersites, come in and rail.
What, art thou devout? wast thou in prayer?
Thersites, my lord.
Thy lord, Thersites: then tell me, I pray thee,
what's thyself?
Thou mayst tell that knowest.
You rascal!
Why am I a fool?
Within his tent; but ill disposed, my lord.
I shall say so to him.
Achilles bids me say, he is much sorry,
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Did move your greatness and this noble state
To call upon him; he hopes it is no other
But for your health and your digestion sake,
And after-dinner's breath.
I shall; and bring his answer presently.
They pass by strangely: they were used to bend
To send their smiles before them to Achilles;
To come as humbly as they used to creep
To holy altars.
To this effect, Achilles, have I moved you:
A woman impudent and mannish grown
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man
In time of action. I stand condemn'd for this;
They think my little stomach to the war
And your great love to me restrains you thus:
Sweet, rouse yourself; and the weak wanton Cupid
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold,
And, like a dew-drop from the lion's mane,
Be shook to air.
Ay, and perhaps receive much honour by him.
O, then, beware;
Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves:
Omission to do what is necessary
Seals a commission to a blank of danger;
And danger, like an ague, subtly taints
Even then when we sit idly in the sun.
Jove bless great Ajax!
I come from the worthy Achilles,--
Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent,--
And to procure safe-conduct from Agamemnon.
Ay, my lord.
What say you to't?
Your answer, sir.
Your answer, sir.
But that's no argument for kissing now;
For this popp'd Paris in his hardiment,
And parted thus you and your argument.
The first was Menelaus' kiss; this, mine:
Patroclus kisses you.
Paris and I kiss evermore for him.
Both take and give.
Here comes Thersites.
Who keeps the tent now?
Well said, adversity! and what need these tricks?
Male varlet, you rogue! what's that?
Why thou damnable box of envy, thou, what meanest
thou to curse thus?
Why no, you ruinous butt, you whoreson
indistinguishable cur, no.
Out, gall!
