Better than I was: hem!
You muddy rascal, is that all the comfort you give me?
I make them! gluttony and diseases make them; I
make them not.
Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.
Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!
Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full
hogshead? there's a whole merchant's venture of
Bourdeaux stuff in him; you have not seen a hulk
better stuffed in the hold. Come, I'll be friends
with thee, Jack: thou art going to the wars; and
whether I shall ever see thee again or no, there is
nobody cares.
Hang him, swaggering rascal! let him not come
hither: it is the foul-mouthed'st rogue in England.
So you do, hostess.
Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion. What!
you poor, base, rascally, cheating, lack-linen
mate! Away, you mouldy rogue, away! I am meat for
your master.
Away, you cut-purse rascal! you filthy bung, away!
by this wine, I'll thrust my knife in your mouldy
chaps, an you play the saucy cuttle with me. Away,
you bottle-ale rascal! you basket-hilt stale
juggler, you! Since when, I pray you, sir? God's
light, with two points on your shoulder? much!
Captain! thou abominable damned cheater, art thou
not ashamed to be called captain? An captains were
of my mind, they would truncheon you out, for
taking their names upon you before you have earned
them. You a captain! you slave, for what? for
tearing a poor whore's ruff in a bawdy-house? He a
captain! hang him, rogue! he lives upon mouldy
stewed prunes and dried cakes. A captain! God's
light, these villains will make the word as odious
as the word 'occupy;' which was an excellent good
word before it was ill sorted: therefore captains
had need look to 't.
For God's sake, thrust him down stairs: I cannot
endure such a fustian rascal.
I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee, do not draw.
I pray thee, Jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone.
Ah, you whoreson little valiant villain, you!
Ah, you sweet little rogue, you! alas, poor ape,
how thou sweatest! come, let me wipe thy face;
come on, you whoreson chops: ah, rogue! i'faith, I
love thee: thou art as valorous as Hector of Troy,
worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better than
the Nine Worthies: ah, villain!
Do, an thou darest for thy heart: an thou dost,
I'll canvass thee between a pair of sheets.
I' faith, and thou followedst him like a church.
Thou whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig,
when wilt thou leave fighting o' days and foining
o' nights, and begin to patch up thine old body for heaven?
Sirrah, what humour's the prince of?
They say Poins has a good wit.
Why does the prince love him so, then?
By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.
I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young
boy of them all.
By my troth, thou'lt set me a-weeping, an thou
sayest so: prove that ever I dress myself handsome
till thy return: well, harken at the end.
How, you fat fool! I scorn you.
What says your grace?
I cannot speak; if my heart be not read to burst,--
well, sweet Jack, have a care of thyself.
Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. Come on; I 'll tell
thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal, an
the child I now go with do miscarry, thou wert
better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou
paper-faced villain.
I'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I
will have you as soundly swinged for this,--you
blue-bottle rogue, you filthy famished correctioner,
if you be not swinged, I'll forswear half-kirtles.
Come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice.
Goodman death, goodman bones!
Come, you thin thing; come you rascal.
