Master Fang, have you entered the action?
Where's your yeoman? Is't a lusty yeoman?
Will a' stand to 't?
O Lord, ay! good Master Snare.
Yea, good Master Snare; I have entered him
and all.
Alas the day! take heed of him; he stabbed
me in mine own house, and that most beastly: in good faith, he
cares not what mischief he does. If his weapon be
out: he will foin like any devil; he will spare neither
man, woman, nor child.
No, nor I neither: I'll be at your elbow.
I am undone by his going; I warrant you,
he's an infinitive thing upon my score. Good Master
Fang, hold him sure: good Master Snare, let him
not 'scape. A' comes continuantly to Pie-corner
--saving your manhoods--to buy a saddle; and he is
indited to dinner to the Lubber's-head in Lumbert
street, to Master Smooth's the silkman: I pray ye,
since my exion is entered and my case so openly
known to the world, let him be brought in to his
answer. A hundred mark is a long one for a poor lone
woman to bear: and I have borne, and borne, and
borne, and have been fubbed off, and fubbed off, and
fubbed off, from this day to that day, that it is a
shame to be thought on. There is no honesty in such
dealing; unless a woman should be made an ass and a
beast, to bear every knave's wrong.
Yonder he comes; and that errant malmsey-nose knave,
Bardolph, with him. Do your offices, do your
offices: Master Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me,
do me your offices.
Throw me in the channel! I'll throw thee in the
channel. Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly
rogue! Murder, murder! Ah, thou honeysuckle
villain! wilt thou kill God's officers and the
king's? Ah, thou honey-seed rogue! thou art a
honey-seed, a man-queller, and a woman-queller.
Good people, bring a rescue or two. Thou wo't, wo't
thou? Thou wo't, wo't ta? do, do, thou rogue! do,
thou hemp-seed!
Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you, stand to me.
O most worshipful lord, an't please your grace, I am
a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.
It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all,
all I have. He hath eaten me out of house and home;
he hath put all my substance into that fat belly of
his: but I will have some of it out again, or I
will ride thee o' nights like the mare.
Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the
money too. Thou didst swear to me upon a
parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin-chamber,
at the round table, by a sea-coal fire, upon
Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the prince broke
thy head for liking his father to a singing-man of
Windsor, thou didst swear to me then, as I was
washing thy wound, to marry me and make me my lady
thy wife. Canst thou deny it? Did not goodwife
Keech, the butcher's wife, come in then and call me
gossip Quickly? coming in to borrow a mess of
vinegar; telling us she had a good dish of prawns;
whereby thou didst desire to eat some; whereby I
told thee they were ill for a green wound? And
didst thou not, when she was gone down stairs,
desire me to be no more so familiarity with such
poor people; saying that ere long they should call
me madam? And didst thou not kiss me and bid me
fetch thee thirty shillings? I put thee now to thy
book-oath: deny it, if thou canst.
Yea, in truth, my lord.
Faith, you said so before.
By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fain
to pawn both my plate and the tapestry of my
dining-chambers.
Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles: i'
faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God save me,
la!
Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown. I
hope you'll come to supper. You'll pay me all together?
Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at supper?
I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an
excellent good temperality: your pulsidge beats as
extraordinarily as heart would desire; and your
colour, I warrant you, is as red as any rose, in good
truth, la! But, i' faith, you have drunk too much
canaries; and that's a marvellous searching wine,
and it perfumes the blood ere one can say 'What's
this?' How do you now?
Why, that's well said; a good heart's worth gold.
Lo, here comes Sir John.
Sick of a calm; yea, good faith.
By my troth, this is the old fashion; you two never
meet but you fall to some discord: you are both,
i' good truth, as rheumatic as two dry toasts; you
cannot one bear with another's confirmities. What
the good-year! one must bear, and that must be
you: you are the weaker vessel, as they say, the
emptier vessel.
If he swagger, let him not come here: no, by my
faith; I must live among my neighbours: I'll no
swaggerers: I am in good name and fame with the
very best: shut the door; there comes no swaggerers
here: I have not lived all this while, to have
swaggering now: shut the door, I pray you.
Pray ye, pacify yourself, Sir John: there comes no
swaggerers here.
Tilly-fally, Sir John, ne'er tell me: your ancient
swaggerer comes not in my doors. I was before Master
Tisick, the debuty, t'other day; and, as he said to
me, 'twas no longer ago than Wednesday last, 'I'
good faith, neighbour Quickly,' says he; Master
Dumbe, our minister, was by then; 'neighbour
Quickly,' says he, 'receive those that are civil;
for,' said he, 'you are in an ill name:' now a'
said so, I can tell whereupon; 'for,' says he, 'you
are an honest woman, and well thought on; therefore
take heed what guests you receive: receive,' says
he, 'no swaggering companions.' There comes none
here: you would bless you to hear what he said:
no, I'll no swaggerers.
Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest man my
house, nor no cheater: but I do not love
swaggering, by my troth; I am the worse, when one
says swagger: feel, masters, how I shake; look you,
I warrant you.
Do I? yea, in very truth, do I, an 'twere an aspen
leaf: I cannot abide swaggerers.
Come, I'll drink no proofs nor no bullets: I'll
drink no more than will do me good, for no man's
pleasure, I.
No, Good Captain Pistol; not here, sweet captain.
Good Captain Peesel, be quiet; 'tis very late, i'
faith: I beseek you now, aggravate your choler.
By my troth, captain, these are very bitter words.
O' my word, captain, there's none such here. What
the good-year! do you think I would deny her? For
God's sake, be quiet.
Here's goodly stuff toward!
Here's a goodly tumult! I'll forswear keeping
house, afore I'll be in these tirrits and frights.
So; murder, I warrant now. Alas, alas! put up
your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.
He you not hurt i' the groin? methought a' made a
shrewd thrust at your belly.
O, the Lord preserve thy good grace! by my troth,
welcome to London. Now, the Lord bless that sweet
face of thine! O, Jesu, are you come from Wales?
God's blessing of your good heart! and so she is,
by my troth.
No, I warrant you.
All victuallers do so; what's a joint of mutton or
two in a whole Lent?
Who knocks so loud at door? Look to the door there, Francis.
Well, fare thee well: I have known thee these
twenty-nine years, come peascod-time; but an
honester and truer-hearted man,--well, fare thee well.
What's the matter?
O, run, Doll, run; run, good Doll: come.
Yea, will you come, Doll?
No, thou arrant knave; I would to God that I might
die, that I might have thee hanged: thou hast
drawn my shoulder out of joint.
O the Lord, that Sir John were come! he would make
this a bloody day to somebody. But I pray God the
fruit of her womb miscarry!
O God, that right should thus overcome might!
Well, of sufferance comes ease.
Ay, come, you starved blood-hound.
Thou atomy, thou!
