What fellow's this?
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid
the house.
What are you?
A marvellous poor one.
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
station; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.
What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a
strange guest he has here.
Where dwellest thou?
Under the canopy!
Where's that?
I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!
Then thou dwellest with daws too?
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?
O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!
I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as
lieve be a condemned man.
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,
Caius Marcius.
I do not say 'thwack our general;' but he was always
good enough for him.
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son
and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' the table; no
question asked him by any of the senators, but they
stand bald before him: our general himself makes a
mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and
turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But
the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i'
the middle and but one half of what he was
yesterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty
and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he
will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.
Do't! he will do't; for, look you, sir, he has as
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it
were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as
we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again,
and the man in blood, they will out of their
burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with
him.
To-morrow; to-day; presently; you shall have the
drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a
parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they
wipe their lips.
Reason; because they then less need one another.
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap
as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.
