Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or
you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?
I, sir! ne'er a whit.
The better for him: would I were so too!
He that has the two fair daughters: is't he you mean?
Master, master! news, old news, and such news as
you never heard of!
Why, is it not news, to hear of Petruchio's coming?
Why, no, sir.
He is coming.
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old
jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair
of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled,
another laced, an old rusty sword ta'en out of the
town-armory, with a broken hilt, and chapeless;
with two broken points: his horse hipped with an
old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred;
besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose
in the chine; troubled with the lampass, infected
with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with
spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives,
stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the
bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten;
near-legged before and with, a half-chequed bit
and a head-stall of sheeps leather which, being
restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been
often burst and now repaired with knots; one girth
six time pieced and a woman's crupper of velure,
which hath two letters for her name fairly set down
in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned
like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a
kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red
and blue list; an old hat and 'the humour of forty
fancies' pricked in't for a feather: a monster, a
very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
Why, sir, he comes not.
Who? that Petruchio came?
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
A horse and a man
Is more than one,
And yet not many.
O master, master, I have watch'd so long
That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn.
Master, a mercatante, or a pedant,
I know not what; but format in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.
Tut, fear not me.
I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.
I pray the gods she may with all my heart!
Cambio!
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind, to
expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving father of a deceitful son.
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your
command at all hours.
I cannot tell; expect they are busied about a
counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her,
'cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum:' to the
church; take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient
honest witnesses: If this be not that you look for,
I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for
ever and a day.
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an
afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to
stuff a rabbit; and so may you, sir: and so, adieu,
sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint
Luke's, to bid the priest be ready to come against
you come with your appendix.
Softly and swiftly, sir; for the priest is ready.
Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back; and
then come back to my master's as soon as I can.
I have seen them in the church together: God send
'em good shipping! But who is here? mine old
master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.
Hope I may choose, sir.
Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I
never saw you before in all my life.
What, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir:
see where he looks out of the window.
Help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.
O! we are spoiled and--yonder he is: deny him,
forswear him, or else we are all undone.
I go.
Sir, my mistress sends you word
That she is busy and she cannot come.
She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
She will not come: she bids you come to her.
