I'll pheeze you, in faith.
Ye are a baggage: the Slys are no rogues; look in
the chronicles; we came in with Richard Conqueror.
Therefore paucas pallabris; let the world slide: sessa!
No, not a denier. Go by, Jeronimy: go to thy cold
bed, and warm thee.
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him
by law: I'll not budge an inch, boy: let him come,
and kindly.
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.
I am Christophero Sly; call not me 'honour' nor
'lordship:' I ne'er drank sack in my life; and if
you give me any conserves, give me conserves of
beef: ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear; for I
have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings
than legs, nor no more shoes than feet; nay,
sometimes more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my
toes look through the over-leather.
What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher
Sly, old Sly's son of Burtonheath, by birth a
pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a
bear-herd, and now by present profession a tinker?
Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of Wincot, if
she know me not: if she say I am not fourteen pence
on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the
lyingest knave in Christendom. What! I am not
bestraught: here's--
Am I a lord? and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? or have I dream'd till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savours and I feel soft things:
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed
And not a tinker nor Christophero Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?
Ay, the woman's maid of the house.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!
I thank thee: thou shalt not lose by it.
Marry, I fare well for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me 'lord:' I am your goodman.
I know it well. What must I call her?
Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?
Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you and come now to bed.
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly
tarry so long. But I would be loath to fall into
my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in
despite of the flesh and the blood.
Marry, I will, let them play it. Is not a
comondy a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
What, household stuff?
Well, well see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side
and let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger.
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely:
comes there any more of it?
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady:
would 'twere done!
