Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you,
go and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert, a box,
a green-a box: do intend vat I speak? a green-a box.
Fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je
m'en vais a la cour--la grande affaire.
Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vere
is dat knave Rugby?
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come,
take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the court.
By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me!
Qu'ai-j'oublie! dere is some simples in my closet,
dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave behind.
O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villain! larron!
Rugby, my rapier!
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
What shall de honest man do in my closet? dere is
no honest man dat shall come in my closet.
Vell.
Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baille me some paper.
Tarry you a little-a while.
You jack'nape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by
gar, it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in dee
park; and I will teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest
to meddle or make. You may be gone; it is not good
you tarry here. By gar, I will cut all his two
stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw
at his dog:
It is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me
dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I
vill kill de Jack priest; and I have appointed mine
host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar, I
will myself have Anne Page.
Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my
door. Follow my heels, Rugby.
Jack Rugby!
Vat is de clock, Jack?
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come; he
has pray his Pible well, dat he is no come: by gar,
Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he be come.
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him.
Take your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Villany, take your rapier.
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de vorld; he
is not show his face.
I pray you, bear vitness that me have stay six or
seven, two, tree hours for him, and he is no come.
Mock-vater! vat is dat?
By gar, den, I have as mush mock-vater as de
Englishman. Scurvy jack-dog priest! by gar, me
vill cut his ears.
Clapper-de-claw! vat is dat?
By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me;
for, by gar, me vill have it.
Me tank you for dat.
By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for a
jack-an-ape to Anne Page.
By gar, me dank you for dat: by gar, I love you;
and I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl,
de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my patients.
By gar, 'tis good; vell said.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.
Vherefore vill you not meet-a me?
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.
Diable! Jack Rugby,--mine host de Jarteer,--have I
not stay for him to kill him? have I not, at de place
I did appoint?
Ay, dat is very good; excellent.
Ha, do I perceive dat? have you make-a de sot of
us, ha, ha?
By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring me
where is Anne Page; by gar, he deceive me too.
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-a
Quickly tell me so mush.
Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.
By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France; it is not
jealous in France.
By gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.
By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.
If dere be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
Dat is good; by gar, with all my heart!
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?
I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a me dat
you make grand preparation for a duke de Jamany: by
my trot, dere is no duke dat the court is know to
come. I tell you for good vill: adieu.
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened: I ha'
married un garcon, a boy; un paysan, by gar, a boy;
it is not Anne Page: by gar, I am cozened.
Ay, by gar, and 'tis a boy: by gar, I'll raise all Windsor.
