The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;
it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to
man, and signifies love.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Yes, py'r lady; if he has a quarter of your coat,
there is but three skirts for yourself, in my
simple conjectures: but that is all one. If Sir
John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto
you, I am of the church, and will be glad to do my
benevolence to make atonements and compremises
between you.
It is not meet the council hear a riot; there is no
fear of Got in a riot: the council, look you, shall
desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a
riot; take your vizaments in that.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it:
and there is also another device in my prain, which
peradventure prings goot discretions with it: there
is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas
Page, which is pretty virginity.
It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as
you will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys,
and gold and silver, is her grandsire upon his
death's-bed--Got deliver to a joyful resurrections!
--give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years
old: it were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles
and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master
Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.
Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do
despise one that is false, or as I despise one that
is not true. The knight, Sir John, is there; and, I
beseech you, be ruled by your well-willers. I will
peat the door for Master Page.
What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
Shallow; and here young Master Slender, that
peradventures shall tell you another tale, if
matters grow to your likings.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
three umpires in this matter, as I understand; that
is, Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is
myself, fidelicet myself; and the three party is,
lastly and finally, mine host of the Garter.
Fery goot: I will make a prief of it in my note-
book; and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with
as great discreetly as we can.
The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this, 'He
hears with ear'? why, it is affectations.
No; it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is!
So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender: I will
description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
But that is not the question: the question is
concerning your marriage.
Marry, is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne Page.
But can you affection the 'oman? Let us command to
know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers
philosophers hold that the lips is parcel of the
mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your
good will to the maid?
Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak
possitable, if you can carry her your desires
towards her.
It is a fery discretion answer; save the fall is in
the ort 'dissolutely:' the ort is, according to our
meaning, 'resolutely:' his meaning is good.
Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which
is the way: and there dwells one Mistress Quickly,
which is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry
nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer, and
his wringer.
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it
is a 'oman that altogether's acquaintance with
Mistress Anne Page: and the letter is, to desire
and require her to solicit your master's desires to
Mistress Anne Page. I pray you, be gone: I will
make an end of my dinner; there's pippins and cheese to come.
I pray you now, good master Slender's serving-man,
and friend Simple by your name, which way have you
looked for Master Caius, that calls himself doctor of physic?
I most fehemently desire you you will also look that
way.
'Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and
trempling of mind! I shall be glad if he have
deceived me. How melancholies I am! I will knog
his urinals about his knave's costard when I have
good opportunities for the ork. 'Pless my soul!
To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sings madrigals;
There will we make our peds of roses,
And a thousand fragrant posies.
To shallow--
Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.
Melodious birds sing madrigals--
When as I sat in Pabylon--
And a thousand vagram posies.
To shallow &c.
He's welcome.
To shallow rivers, to whose falls-
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
Pray you, give me my gown; or else keep it in your arms.
'Pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!
There is reasons and causes for it.
Fery well: what is it?
What is he?
Got's will, and his passion of my heart! I had as
lief you would tell me of a mess of porridge.
He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen,
--and he is a knave besides; a cowardly knave as you
would desires to be acquainted withal.
As I am a Christians soul now, look you, this is the
place appointed: I'll be judgement by mine host of
the Garter.
This is well; he has made us his vlouting-stog. I
desire you that we may be friends; and let us knog
our prains together to be revenge on this same
scall, scurvy cogging companion, the host of the Garter.
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you, follow.
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
If there be any pody in the house, and in the
chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses,
heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment!
You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is as
honest a 'omans as I will desires among five
thousand, and five hundred too.
If there is one, I shall make two in the company.
I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousy
knave, mine host.
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!
No; Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
William, how many numbers is in nouns?
Peace your tattlings! What is 'fair,' William?
You are a very simplicity 'oman: I pray you peace.
What is 'lapis,' William?
And what is 'a stone,' William?
No, it is 'lapis:' I pray you, remember in your prain.
That is a good William. What is he, William, that
does lend articles?
Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark:
genitivo, hujus. Well, what is your accusative case?
I pray you, have your remembrance, child,
accusative, hung, hang, hog.
Leave your prabbles, 'oman. What is the focative
case, William?
Remember, William; focative is caret.
'Oman, forbear.
What is your genitive case plural, William?
Ay.
For shame, 'oman.
'Oman, art thou lunatics? hast thou no
understandings for thy cases and the numbers of the
genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures as
I would desires.
Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.
It is qui, quae, quod: if you forget your 'quies,'
your 'quaes,' and your 'quods,' you must be
preeches. Go your ways, and play; go.
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.
Why, this is lunatics! this is mad as a mad dog!
'Tis unreasonable! Will you take up your wife's
clothes? Come away.
Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
imaginations of your own heart: this is jealousies.
By the yea and no, I think the 'oman is a witch
indeed: I like not when a 'oman has a great peard;
I spy a great peard under his muffler.
'Tis one of the best discretions of a 'oman as ever
I did look upon.
You say he has been thrown in the rivers and has
been grievously peaten as an old 'oman: methinks
there should be terrors in him that he should not
come; methinks his flesh is punished, he shall have
no desires.
I will teach the children their behaviors; and I
will be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the
knight with my taber.
Let us about it: it is admirable pleasures and fery
honest knaveries.
Where is mine host?
Have a care of your entertainments: there is a
friend of mine come to town tells me there is three
cozen-germans that has cozened all the hosts of
Readins, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and
money. I tell you for good will, look you: you
are wise and full of gibes and vlouting-stocks, and
'tis not convenient you should be cozened. Fare you well.
Trib, trib, fairies; come; and remember your parts:
be pold, I pray you; follow me into the pit; and
when I give the watch-'ords, do as I pid you:
come, come; trib, trib.
Where's Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid
That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy:
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides and shins.
Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But, stay; I smell a man of middle-earth.
Come, will this wood take fire?
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your
desires, and fairies will not pinse you.
And leave your jealousies too, I pray you.
Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all putter.
And given to fornications, and to taverns and sack
and wine and metheglins, and to drinkings and
swearings and starings, pribbles and prabbles?
