We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think
we shall never see the end of it. Who goes there?
Under what captain serve you?
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman: I
pray you, what thinks he of our estate?
That's more than we know.
But if the cause be not good, the king himself hath
a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and
arms and heads, chopped off in battle, shall join
together at the latter day and cry all 'We died at
such a place;' some swearing, some crying for a
surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind
them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their
children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die
well that die in a battle; for how can they
charitably dispose of any thing, when blood is their
argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it
will be a black matter for the king that led them to
it; whom to disobey were against all proportion of
subjection.
'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon
his own head, the king is not to answer it.
Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully: but
when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we
ne'er the wiser.
You pay him then. That's a perilous shot out of an
elder-gun, that a poor and private displeasure can
do against a monarch! you may as well go about to
turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a
peacock's feather. You'll never trust his word
after! come, 'tis a foolish saying.
Let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.
How shall I know thee again?
Here's my glove: give me another of thine.
This will I also wear in my cap: if ever thou come
to me and say, after to-morrow, 'This is my glove,'
by this hand, I will take thee a box on the ear.
Thou darest as well be hanged.
Keep thy word: fare thee well.
An't please your majesty, 'tis the gage of one that
I should fight withal, if he be alive.
An't please your majesty, a rascal that swaggered
with me last night; who, if alive and ever dare to
challenge this glove, I have sworn to take him a box
o' th' ear: or if I can see my glove in his cap,
which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear
if alive, I will strike it out soundly.
So I will, my liege, as I live.
Under Captain Gower, my liege.
I will, my liege.
I warrant it is to knight you, captain.
Sir, know you this glove?
I know this; and thus I challenge it.
Do you think I'll be forsworn?
I am no traitor.
My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of
it; and he that I gave it to in change promised to
wear it in his cap: I promised to strike him, if he
did: I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I
have been as good as my word.
All offences, my lord, come from the heart: never
came any from mine that might offend your majesty.
Your majesty came not like yourself: you appeared to
me but as a common man; witness the night, your
garments, your lowliness; and what your highness
suffered under that shape, I beseech you take it for
your own fault and not mine: for had you been as I
took you for, I made no offence; therefore, I
beseech your highness, pardon me.
I will none of your money.
