It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.
You are loved, sir:
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
O, 'tis brave wars!
I am your accessary; and so, farewell.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
No better, if you please.
Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man,
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion: therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guess'd.
Nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his
way.
On my life, my lord, a bubble.
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
without any malice, but to speak of him as my
kinsman, he's a most notable coward, an infinite and
endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner
of no one good quality worthy your lordship's
entertainment.
I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly
surprise him; such I will have, whom I am sure he
knows not from the enemy: we will bind and hoodwink
him so, that he shall suppose no other but that he
is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries, when
we bring him to our own tents. Be but your lordship
present at his examination: if he do not, for the
promise of his life and in the highest compulsion of
base fear, offer to betray you and deliver all the
intelligence in his power against you, and that with
the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never
trust my judgment in any thing.
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a
strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems
to undertake this business, which he knows is not to
be done; damns himself to do and dares better be
damned than to do't?
None in the world; but return with an invention and
clap upon you two or three probable lies: but we
have almost embossed him; you shall see his fall
to-night; for indeed he is not for your lordship's respect.
I must go look my twigs: he shall be caught.
As't please your lordship: I'll leave you.
He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.
When you sally upon him, speak what terrible
language you will: though you understand it not
yourselves, no matter; for we must not seem to
understand him, unless some one among us whom we
must produce for an interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice?
But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to us again?
He must think us some band of strangers i' the
adversary's entertainment. Now he hath a smack of
all neighbouring languages; therefore we must every
one be a man of his own fancy, not to know what we
speak one to another; so we seem to know, is to
know straight our purpose: choughs' language,
gabble enough, and good enough. As for you,
interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch,
ho! here he comes, to beguile two hours in a sleep,
and then to return and swear the lies he forges.
This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue
was guilty of.
Is it possible he should know what he is, and be
that he is?
We cannot afford you so.
'Twould not do.
Hardly serve.
How deep?
Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.
You shall hear one anon.
Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
Oscorbidulchos volivorco.
Go, tell the Count Rousillon, and my brother,
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them.
A' will betray us all unto ourselves:
Inform on that.
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
I have delivered it an hour since: there is
something in't that stings his nature; for on the
reading it he changed almost into another man.
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting
displeasure of the king, who had even tuned his
bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you a
thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in
Florence, of a most chaste renown; and this night he
fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour: he hath
given her his monumental ring, and thinks himself
made in the unchaste composition.
Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course
of all treasons, we still see them reveal
themselves, till they attain to their abhorred ends,
so he that in this action contrives against his own
nobility, in his proper stream o'erflows himself.
Not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.
We will not meddle with him till he come; for his
presence must be the whip of the other.
I hear there is an overture of peace.
What will Count Rousillon do then? will he travel
higher, or return again into France?
Let it be forbid, sir; so should I be a great deal
of his act.
How is this justified?
Hath the count all this intelligence?
I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
And how mightily some other times we drown our gain
in tears! The great dignity that his valour hath
here acquired for him shall at home be encountered
with a shame as ample.
They shall be no more than needful there, if they
were more than they can commend.
If the business be of any difficulty, and this
morning your departure hence, it requires haste of
your lordship.
Bring him forth: has sat i' the stocks all night,
poor gallant knave.
I have told your lordship already, the stocks carry
him. But to answer you as you would be understood;
he weeps like a wench that had shed her milk: he
hath confessed himself to Morgan, whom he supposes
to be a friar, from the time of his remembrance to
this very instant disaster of his setting i' the
stocks: and what think you he hath confessed?
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his
face: if your lordship be in't, as I believe you
are, you must have the patience to hear it.
I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword
clean. nor believe he can have every thing in him
by wearing his apparel neatly.
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
linguist and the armipotent soldier.
Why does be ask him of me?
God bless you, Captain Parolles.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu?
I am for France.
