I am glad you're well.
It wears, sir, as it grows.
I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.
You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication
To the great lord.
A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?
'Tis a good piece.
Indifferent.
It is a pretty mocking of the life.
Here is a touch; is't good?
How this lord is follow'd!
Look, more!
How shall I understand you?
I saw them speak together.
'Tis conceived to scope.
This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
With one man beckon'd from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the sleepy mount
To climb his happiness, would be well express'd
In our condition.
Ay, marry, what of these?
'Tis common:
A thousand moral paintings I can show
That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's
More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well
To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
The foot above the head.
A piece of painting, which I do beseech
Your lordship to accept.
The gods preserve ye!
You're a dog.
As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where
he abides.
Certain: Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and
Timandra had gold of him: he likewise enriched poor
straggling soldiers with great quantity: 'tis said
he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.
Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens
again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore
'tis not amiss we tender our loves to him, in this
supposed distress of his: it will show honestly in
us; and is very likely to load our purposes with
what they travail for, if it be a just true report
that goes of his having.
Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I will
promise him an excellent piece.
Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' the
time: it opens the eyes of expectation:
performance is ever the duller for his act; and,
but in the plainer and simpler kind of people, the
deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is
most courtly and fashionable: performance is a kind
of will or testament which argues a great sickness
in his judgment that makes it.
True;
When the day serves, before black-corner'd night,
Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light. Come.
Our late noble master!
He and myself
Have travail'd in the great shower of your gifts,
And sweetly felt it.
We are hither come to offer you our service.
So it is said, my noble lord; but therefore
Came not my friend nor I.
So, so, my lord.
I know none such, my lord.
