What says my bully-rook? speak scholarly and wisely.
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier: let them wag; trot, trot.
Thou'rt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and Pheezar. I
will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall
tap: said I well, bully Hector?
I have spoke; let him follow.
Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word; follow.
How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.
Cavaleiro-justice, I say!
Tell him, cavaleiro-justice; tell him, bully-rook.
What sayest thou, my bully-rook?
Hast thou no suit against my knight, my
guest-cavaleire?
My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress;
--said I well?--and thy name shall be Brook. It is
a merry knight. Will you go, An-heires?
Here, boys, here, here! shall we wag?
Bless thee, bully doctor!
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee
traverse; to see thee here, to see thee there; to
see thee pass thy punto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy
distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my Ethiopian? is
he dead, my Francisco? ha, bully! What says my
AEsculapius? my Galen? my heart of elder? ha! is
he dead, bully stale? is he dead?
Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of Greece, my boy!
Pardon, guest-justice. A word, Mounseur Mockwater.
Mock-water, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
That is, he will make thee amends.
And I will provoke him to't, or let him wag.
And, moreover, bully,--but first, master guest, and
Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you
through the town to Frogmore.
He is there: see what humour he is in; and I will
bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?
Let him die: sheathe thy impatience, throw cold
water on thy choler: go about the fields with me
through Frogmore: I will bring thee where Mistress
Anne Page is, at a farm-house a-feasting; and thou
shalt woo her. Cried I aim? said I well?
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
Page. Said I well?
Let us wag, then.
Disarm them, and let them question: let them keep
their limbs whole and hack our English.
Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,
soul-curer and body-curer!
Peace, I say! hear mine host of the Garter. Am I
politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I
lose my doctor? no; he gives me the potions and the
motions. Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my Sir
Hugh? no; he gives me the proverbs and the
no-verbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial; so. Give me
thy hand, celestial; so. Boys of art, I have
deceived you both; I have directed you to wrong
places: your hearts are mighty, your skins are
whole, and let burnt sack be the issue. Come, lay
their swords to pawn. Follow me, lads of peace;
follow, follow, follow.
What say you to young Master Fenton? he capers, he
dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he
speaks holiday, he smells April and May: he will
carry't, he will carry't; 'tis in his buttons; he
will carry't.
Farewell, my hearts: I will to my honest knight
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.
What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear
not of him in the court. Let me speak with the
gentlemen: they speak English?
They shall have my horses; but I'll make them pay;
I'll sauce them: they have had my house a week at
command; I have turned away my other guests: they
must come off; I'll sauce them. Come.
What wouldst thou have, boor? what: thick-skin?
speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.
There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his
standing-bed and truckle-bed; 'tis painted about
with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go
knock and call; hell speak like an Anthropophaginian
unto thee: knock, I say.
Ha! a fat woman! the knight may be robbed: I'll
call. Bully knight! bully Sir John! speak from
thy lungs military: art thou there? it is thine
host, thine Ephesian, calls.
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of
thy fat woman. Let her descend, bully, let her
descend; my chambers are honourable: fie! privacy?
fie!
Ay, come; quick.
Conceal them, or thou diest.
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was
there a wise woman with thee?
Where be my horses? speak well of them, varletto.
They are gone but to meet the duke, villain: do not
say they be fled; Germans are honest men.
What is the matter, sir?
Here, master doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.
Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight. I am
undone! Fly, run, hue and cry, villain! I am undone!
Master Fenton, talk not to me; my mind is heavy: I
will give over all.
I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will at the
least keep your counsel.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar:
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
