Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star-
chamber matter of it: if he were twenty Sir John
Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
Ay, cousin Slender, and 'Custalourum.
Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
hundred years.
It is an old coat.
The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old coat.
You may, by marrying.
Not a whit.
The council shall bear it; it is a riot.
Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword
should end it.
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?
Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it
your good heart! I wished your venison better; it
was ill killed. How doth good Mistress Page?--and I
thank you always with my heart, la! with my heart.
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
That he will not. 'Tis your fault, 'tis your fault;
'tis a good dog.
Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog: can there be
more said? he is good and fair. Is Sir John
Falstaff here?
He hath wronged me, Master Page.
If it be confessed, it is not redress'd: is not that
so, Master Page? He hath wronged me; indeed he
hath, at a word, he hath, believe me: Robert
Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and
broke open my lodge.
Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.
The council shall know this.
Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word with
you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a
tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh
here. Do you understand me?
Nay, but understand me.
Ay, there's the point, sir.
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what I do
is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.
Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.
I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and
twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go
with us? we have sport in hand.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh
the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.
Have with you, mine host.
Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these times
you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and
I know not what: 'tis the heart, Master Page; 'tis
here, 'tis here. I have seen the time, with my long
sword I would have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.
Save you, Master Doctor Caius!
He is the wiser man, master doctor: he is a curer of
souls, and you a curer of bodies; if you should
fight, you go against the hair of your professions.
Is it not true, Master Page?
Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old and of
the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to
make one. Though we are justices and doctors and
churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our
youth in us; we are the sons of women, Master Page.
It will be found so, Master Page. Master Doctor
Caius, I am come to fetch you home. I am sworn of
the peace: you have showed yourself a wise
physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise
and patient churchman. You must go with me, master doctor.
We will do it.
How now, master Parson! Good morrow, good Sir Hugh.
Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student
from his book, and it is wonderful.
What, the sword and the word! do you study them
both, master parson?
I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never
heard a man of his place, gravity and learning, so
wide of his own respect.
It appears so by his weapons. Keep them asunder:
here comes Doctor Caius.
So do you, good master doctor.
Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, follow.
Well met, Master Ford.
&c.
I must excuse myself, Master Ford.
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and
my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have our answer.
Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer wooing
at Master Page's.
Break their talk, Mistress Quickly: my kinsman shall
speak for himself.
Be not dismayed.
She's coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a father!
Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.
Marry, I thank you for it; I thank you for that good
comfort. She calls you, coz: I'll leave you.
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford; this
wrongs you.
That's good too: but what needs either your 'mum'
or her 'budget?' the white will decipher her well
enough. It hath struck ten o'clock.
