Dear sir, forbear.
Pray, sir, be patient.
My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
Of what hath moved you.
Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
What's the matter, sir?
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
To the great love I bear you,--
Well, you may fear too far.
How far your eyes may pierce I can not tell:
Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
Well, well; the event.
O Goneril!
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face. I fear your disposition:
That nature, which contemns its origin,
Cannot be border'd certain in itself;
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap, perforce must wither
And come to deadly use.
Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile:
Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
A father, and a gracious aged man,
Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded.
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
It will come,
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Like monsters of the deep.
See thyself, devil!
Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman.
Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame,
Be-monster not thy feature. Were't my fitness
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Thy flesh and bones: howe'er thou art a fiend,
A woman's shape doth shield thee.
What news?
Gloucester's eye!
This shows you are above,
You justicers, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!
Lost he his other eye?
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
He is not here.
Knows he the wickedness?
Gloucester, I live
To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king,
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend:
Tell me what more thou know'st.
Our very loving sister, well be-met.
Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigor of our state
Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
I never yet was valiant: for this business,
It toucheth us, as France invades our land,
Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
Let's then determine
With the ancient of war on our proceedings.
I'll overtake you. Speak.
Stay till I have read the letter.
Why, fare thee well: I will o'erlook thy paper.
We will greet the time.
Sir, you have shown to-day your valiant strain,
And fortune led you well: you have the captives
That were the opposites of this day's strife:
We do require them of you, so to use them
As we shall find their merits and our safety
May equally determine.
Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war,
Not as a brother.
The let-alone lies not in your good will.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.
Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
This gilded serpent
For your claim, fair sister,
I bar it in the interest of my wife:
'Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,
And I, her husband, contradict your bans.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
My lady is bespoke.
Thou art arm'd, Gloucester: let the trumpet sound:
If none appear to prove upon thy head
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge;
I'll prove it on thy heart,
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
A herald, ho!
Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.
She is not well; convey her to my tent.
Come hither, herald,--Let the trumpet sound,
And read out this.
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this call o' the trumpet.
Which is that adversary?
Save him, save him!
Shut your mouth, dame,
Or with this paper shall I stop it: Hold, sir:
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil:
No tearing, lady: I perceive you know it.
Most monstrous! oh!
Know'st thou this paper?
Go after her: she's desperate; govern her.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee:
Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I
Did hate thee or thy father!
Where have you hid yourself?
How have you known the miseries of your father?
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.
But who was this?
Speak, man.
Who dead? speak, man.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead:
This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,
Touches us not with pity.
O, is this he?
The time will not allow the compliment
Which very manners urges.
Great thing of us forgot!
Speak, Edmund, where's the king? and where's Cordelia?
See'st thou this object, Kent?
Even so. Cover their faces.
Run, run, O, run!
Haste thee, for thy life.
The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
Fall, and cease!
He knows not what he says: and vain it is
That we present us to him.
That's but a trifle here.
You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
What comfort to this great decay may come
Shall be applied: for us we will resign,
During the life of this old majesty,
To him our absolute power:
you, to your rights:
With boot, and such addition as your honours
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Is general woe.
Friends of my soul, you twain
Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
The weight of this sad time we must obey;
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
The oldest hath borne most: we that are young
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
