Yes, madam.
He's coming, madam; I hear him.
Well, madam.
So please you,--
My lady's father.
I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
I'll not be struck, my lord.
Yes, madam.
Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?
Where may we set our horses?
Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.
Why, then, I care not for thee.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
What dost thou know me for?
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail
on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!
Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
Help, ho! murder! help!
Help, ho! murder! murder!
I am scarce in breath, my lord.
This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared
at suit of his gray beard,--
I never gave him any:
It pleased the king his master very late
To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
When he, conjunct and flattering his displeasure,
Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd,
And put upon him such a deal of man,
That worthied him, got praises of the king
For him attempting who was self-subdued;
And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.
My lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence:
Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
Who, with some other of the lords dependants,
Are gone with him towards Dover; where they boast
To have well-armed friends.
Madam, within; but never man so changed.
I told him of the army that was landed;
He smiled at it: I told him you were coming:
His answer was 'The worse:' of Gloucester's treachery,
And of the loyal service of his son,
When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot,
And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out:
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.
Madam, here comes my lord.
Ay, madam.
Madam, with much ado:
Your sister is the better soldier.
No, madam.
I know not, lady.
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
I may not, madam:
My lady charged my duty in this business.
Madam, I had rather--
I, madam?
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
What party I do follow.
A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out
That must destroy thee.
Wherefore, bold peasant,
Darest thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence;
Lest that the infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
Let go, slave, or thou diest!
Out, dunghill!
Slave, thou hast slain me: villain, take my purse:
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;
And give the letters which thou find'st about me
To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out
Upon the British party: O, untimely death!
