We were never so much out of creatures. We have but
poor three, and they can do no more than they can
do; and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.
Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poor
bastards,--as, I think, I have brought up some eleven--
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind
will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.
Why to give over, I pray you? is it a shame to get
when we are old?
Come, other sorts offend as well as we.
Boult, has she any qualities?
What's her price, Boult?
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her
hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her
virginity; and cry 'He that will give most shall
have her first.' Such a maidenhead were no cheap
thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done
as I command you.
Why lament you, pretty one?
Come, the gods have done their part in you.
You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.
Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.
Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all
fashions: you shall fare well; you shall have the
difference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears?
What would you have me be, an I be not a woman?
Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have
something to do with you. Come, you're a young
foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have
you.
If it please the gods to defend you by men, then men
must comfort you, men must feed you, men must stir
you up. Boult's returned.
Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the
inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on.
Who, Monsieur Veroles?
Well, well; as for him, he brought his disease
hither: here he does but repair it. I know he will
come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the
sun.
Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must; for your
bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go
with warrant.
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.
Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like the
manner of your garments well.
Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a
sojourner we have; you'll lose nothing by custom.
When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good
turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou
hast the harvest out of thine own report.
Come your ways; follow me.
What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us?
Fie, fie upon her! she's able to freeze the god
Priapus, and undo a whole generation. We must
either get her ravished, or be rid of her. When she
should do for clients her fitment, and do me the
kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks,
her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her
knees; that she would make a puritan of the devil,
if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
'Faith, there's no way to be rid on't but by the
way to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
Now, the gods to-bless your honour!
We have here one, sir, if she would--but there never
came her like in Mytilene.
Your honour knows what 'tis to say well enough.
Here comes that which grows to the stalk; never
plucked yet, I can assure you.
Is she not a fair creature?
I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, and
I'll have done presently.
Next, he's the governor of this country, and a man
whom I am bound to.
Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, will
you use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.
My lord, she's not paced yet: you must take some
pains to work her to your manage. Come, we will
leave his honour and her together. Go thy ways.
How now! what's the matter?
O abominable!
Marry, hang her up for ever!
Boult, take her away; use her at thy pleasure:
crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
She conjures: away with her! Would she had never
come within my doors! Marry, hang you! She's born
to undo us. Will you not go the way of women-kind?
Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!
