How now! How a dozen of virginities?
You may so; 'tis the better for you that your
resorters stand upon sound legs. How now!
wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal
withal, and defy the surgeon?
If she'ld do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.
Well, call forth, call forth.
What, prithee?
That dignifies the renown of a bawd, no less than it
gives a good report to a number to be chaste.
'Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea.
Well, there's for you: leave us.
I beseech you, do.
Ha' you done?
Now, pretty one, how long have you been at this trade?
Why, I cannot name't but I shall offend.
How long have you been of this profession?
Did you go to 't so young? Were you a gamester at
five or at seven?
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a
creature of sale.
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?
Why, your herb-woman; she that sets seeds and roots
of shame and iniquity. O, you have heard something
of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious
wooing. But I protest to thee, pretty one, my
authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly
upon thee. Come, bring me to some private place:
come, come.
How's this? how's this? Some more; be sage.
I did not think
Thou couldst have spoke so well; ne'er dream'd thou couldst.
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,
Thy speech had alter'd it. Hold, here's gold for thee:
Persever in that clear way thou goest,
And the gods strengthen thee!
For me, be you thoughten
That I came with no ill intent; for to me
The very doors and windows savour vilely.
Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue, and
I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.
Hold, here's more gold for thee.
A curse upon him, die he like a thief,
That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost
Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!
Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,
Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!
Hail, reverend sir! the gods preserve you!
You wish me well.
Being on shore, honouring of Neptune's triumphs,
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,
I made to it, to know of whence you are.
I am the governor of this place you lie before.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
May we not see him?
Yet let me obtain my wish.
Sir king, all hail! the gods preserve you!
Hail, royal sir!
'Tis well bethought.
She questionless with her sweet harmony
And other chosen attractions, would allure,
And make a battery through his deafen'd parts,
Which now are midway stopp'd:
She is all happy as the fairest of all,
And, with her fellow maids is now upon
The leafy shelter that abuts against
The island's side.
O, sir, a courtesy
Which if we should deny, the most just gods
For every graff would send a caterpillar,
And so afflict our province. Yet once more
Let me entreat to know at large the cause
Of your king's sorrow.
O, here is
The lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one!
Is't not a goodly presence?
She's such a one, that, were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,
I'ld wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed.
Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient:
If that thy prosperous and artificial feat
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,
Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay
As thy desires can wish.
Come, let us leave her;
And the gods make her prosperous!
Mark'd he your music?
See, she will speak to him.
She would never tell
Her parentage; being demanded that,
She would sit still and weep.
It is not good to cross him; give him way.
My lord, I hear.
A pillow for his head:
So, leave him all. Well, my companion friends,
If this but answer to my just belief,
I'll well remember you.
Sir,
With all my heart; and, when you come ashore,
I have another suit.
Sir, lend me your arm.
