It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express
My commendations great, whose merit's less.
Which, to preserve mine honour, I'll perform.
A knight of Sparta, my renowned father;
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is a black Ethiope reaching at the sun
The word, 'Lux tua vita mihi.'
A prince of Macedon, my royal father;
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady;
The motto thus, in Spanish, 'Piu por dulzura que por fuerza.'
The third of Antioch;
And his device, a wreath of chivalry;
The word, 'Me pompae provexit apex.'
A burning torch that's turned upside down;
The word, 'Quod me alit, me extinguit.'
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,
Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried;
The motto thus, 'Sic spectanda fides.'
He seems to be a stranger; but his present is
A wither'd branch, that's only green at top;
The motto, 'In hac spe vivo.'
But you, my knight and guest;
To whom this wreath of victory I give,
And crown you king of this day's happiness.
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,
All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury.
Wishing him my meat. Sure, he's a gallant gentleman.
To me he seems like diamond to glass.
What is it
To me, my father?
Alas, my father, it befits not me
Unto a stranger knight to be so bold:
He may my proffer take for an offence,
Since men take women's gifts for impudence.
The king my father, sir, has drunk to you.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
And further he desires to know of you,
Of whence you are, your name and parentage.
He thanks your grace; names himself Pericles,
A gentleman of Tyre,
Who only by misfortune of the seas
Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.
Why, sir, say if you had,
Who takes offence at that would make me glad?
Yes, if you love me, sir.
O dear Diana,
Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this?
It is my lord's.
That I was shipp'd at sea, I well remember,
Even on my eaning time; but whether there
Deliver'd, by the holy gods,
I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles,
My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again,
A vestal livery will I take me to,
And never more have joy.
My recompense is thanks, that's all;
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Voice and favour!
You are, you are--O royal Pericles!
O, let me look!
If he be none of mine, my sanctity
Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,
But curb it, spite of seeing. O, my lord,
Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,
Like him you are: did you not name a tempest,
A birth, and death?
That Thaisa am I, supposed dead
And drown'd.
Now I know you better.
When we with tears parted Pentapolis,
The king my father gave you such a ring.
Blest, and mine own!
I know you not.
'Twas Helicanus then.
Lord Cerimon, my lord; this man,
Through whom the gods have shown their power; that can
From first to last resolve you.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,
My father's dead.
