How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
A child-like office.
Is he pursued?
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be fear'd of doing harm: make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend itself, you shall be ours:
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
You we first seize on.
You know not why we came to visit you,--
Keep peace, upon your lives:
He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
What is your difference? speak.
Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?
Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
Peace, sirrah!
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
Why art thou angry?
Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
Why dost thou call him a knave?  What's his offence?
No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
This is some fellow,
Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness
Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
Than twenty silly ducking observants
That stretch their duties nicely.
What mean'st by this?
What was the offence you gave him?
Fetch forth the stocks!
You stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart,
We'll teach you--
Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
There shall he sit till noon.
This is a fellow of the self-same colour
Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
I'll answer that.
Hail to your grace!
Fie, sir, fie!
What trumpet's that?
What means your grace?
I set him there, sir: but his own disorders
Deserved much less advancement.
Let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.
Follow'd the old man forth: he is return'd.
Whither is he going?
'Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.
Shut up your doors, my lord; 'tis a wild night:
My Regan counsels well; come out o' the storm.
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
I now perceive, it was not altogether your
brother's evil disposition made him seek his death;
but a provoking merit, set a-work by a reprovable
badness in himself.
o with me to the duchess.
True or false, it hath made thee earl of
Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
may be ready for our apprehension.
I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a
dearer father in my love.
Post speedily to my lord your husband; show him
this letter: the army of France is landed. Seek
out the villain Gloucester.
Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our
sister company: the revenges we are bound to take
upon your traitorous father are not fit for your
beholding. Advise the duke, where you are going, to
a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the
like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent
betwixt us. Farewell, dear sister: farewell, my
lord of Gloucester.
How now! where's the king?
Get horses for your mistress.
Edmund, farewell.
Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not control. Who's there? the traitor?
Bind fast his corky arms.
Bind him, I say.
To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find--
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
Late footed in the kingdom?
Cunning.
Where hast thou sent the king?
Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.
See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
If you see vengeance,--
My villain!
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
Where is thy lustre now?
I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.
Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave
Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:
Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.
