Will this gear ne'er be mended?
Well, I have told you enough of this: for my part,
I'll not meddle nor make no further. He that will
have a cake out of the wheat must needs tarry the grinding.
Ay, the grinding; but you must tarry
the bolting.
Ay, the bolting, but you must tarry the leavening.
Ay, to the leavening; but here's yet in the word
'hereafter' the kneading, the making of the cake, the
heating of the oven and the baking; nay, you must
stay the cooling too, or you may chance to burn your lips.
Well, she looked yesternight fairer than ever I saw
her look, or any woman else.
An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's--
well, go to--there were no more comparison between
the women: but, for my part, she is my kinswoman; I
would not, as they term it, praise her: but I would
somebody had heard her talk yesterday, as I did. I
will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but--
I speak no more than truth.
Faith, I'll not meddle in't. Let her be as she is:
if she be fair, 'tis the better for her; an she be
not, she has the mends in her own hands.
I have had my labour for my travail; ill-thought on of
her and ill-thought on of you; gone between and
between, but small thanks for my labour.
Because she's kin to me, therefore she's not so fair
as Helen: an she were not kin to me, she would be as
fair on Friday as Helen is on Sunday. But what care
I? I care not an she were a black-a-moor; 'tis all one to me.
I do not care whether you do or no. She's a fool to
stay behind her father; let her to the Greeks; and so
I'll tell her the next time I see her: for my part,
I'll meddle nor make no more i' the matter.
Not I.
Pray you, speak no more to me: I will leave all as I
found it, and there an end.
What's that? what's that?
Good morrow, cousin Cressid: what do you talk of?
Good morrow, Alexander. How do you, cousin? When
were you at Ilium?
What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector
armed and gone ere ye came to Ilium? Helen was not
up, was she?
Even so: Hector was stirring early.
Was he angry?
True, he was so: I know the cause too: he'll lay
about him to-day, I can tell them that: and there's
Troilus will not come far behind him: let them take
heed of Troilus, I can tell them that too.
Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two.
What, not between Troilus and Hector? Do you know a
man if you see him?
Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.
No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.
Himself! Alas, poor Troilus! I would he were.
Condition, I had gone barefoot to India.
Himself! no, he's not himself: would a' were
himself! Well, the gods are above; time must friend
or end: well, Troilus, well: I would my heart were
in her body. No, Hector is not a better man than Troilus.
He is elder.
Th' other's not come to't; you shall tell me another
tale, when th' other's come to't. Hector shall not
have his wit this year.
Nor his qualities.
Nor his beauty.
You have no judgment, niece: Helen
herself swore th' other day, that Troilus, for
a brown favour--for so 'tis, I must confess,--
not brown neither,--
'Faith, to say truth, brown and not brown.
She praised his complexion above Paris.
So he has.
I swear to you. I think Helen loves him better than Paris.
Nay, I am sure she does. She came to him th' other
day into the compassed window,--and, you know, he
has not past three or four hairs on his chin,--
Why, he is very young: and yet will he, within
three pound, lift as much as his brother Hector.
But to prove to you that Helen loves him: she came
and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin--
Why, you know 'tis dimpled: I think his smiling
becomes him better than any man in all Phrygia.
Does he not?
Why, go to, then: but to prove to you that Helen
loves Troilus,--
Troilus! why, he esteems her no more than I esteem
an addle egg.
I cannot choose but laugh, to think how she tickled
his chin: indeed, she has a marvellous white hand, I
must needs confess,--
And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin.
But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laughed
that her eyes ran o'er.
And Cassandra laughed.
And Hector laughed.
Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus' chin.
They laughed not so much at the hair as at his pretty answer.
Quoth she, 'Here's but two and fifty hairs on your
chin, and one of them is white.
That's true; make no question of that. 'Two and
fifty hairs' quoth he, 'and one white: that white
hair is my father, and all the rest are his sons.'
'Jupiter!' quoth she, 'which of these hairs is Paris,
my husband? 'The forked one,' quoth he, 'pluck't
out, and give it him.' But there was such laughing!
and Helen so blushed, an Paris so chafed, and all the
rest so laughed, that it passed.
Well, cousin. I told you a thing yesterday; think on't.
I'll be sworn 'tis true; he will weep you, an 'twere
a man born in April.
Hark! they are coming from the field: shall we
stand up here, and see them as they pass toward
Ilium? good niece, do, sweet niece Cressida.
Here, here, here's an excellent place; here we may
see most bravely: I'll tell you them all by their
names as they pass by; but mark Troilus above the rest.
That's AEneas: is not that a brave man? he's one of
the flowers of Troy, I can tell you: but mark
Troilus; you shall see anon.
That's Antenor: he has a shrewd wit, I can tell you;
and he's a man good enough, he's one o' the soundest
judgments in whosoever, and a proper man of person.
When comes Troilus? I'll show you Troilus anon: if
he see me, you shall see him nod at me.
You shall see.
That's Hector, that, that, look you, that; there's a
fellow! Go thy way, Hector! There's a brave man,
niece. O brave Hector! Look how he looks! there's
a countenance! is't not a brave man?
Is a' not? it does a man's heart good. Look you
what hacks are on his helmet! look you yonder, do
you see? look you there: there's no jesting;
there's laying on, take't off who will, as they say:
there be hacks!
Swords! any thing, he cares not; an the devil come
to him, it's all one: by God's lid, it does one's
heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris.
Look ye yonder, niece; is't not a gallant man too,
is't not? Why, this is brave now. Who said he came
hurt home to-day? he's not hurt: why, this will do
Helen's heart good now, ha! Would I could see
Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.
That's Helenus. I marvel where Troilus is. That's
Helenus. I think he went not forth to-day. That's Helenus.
Helenus? no. Yes, he'll fight indifferent well. I
marvel where Troilus is. Hark! do you not hear the
people cry 'Troilus'? Helenus is a priest.
Where? yonder? that's Deiphobus. 'Tis Troilus!
there's a man, niece! Hem! Brave Troilus! the
prince of chivalry!
Mark him; note him. O brave Troilus! Look well upon
him, niece: look you how his sword is bloodied, and
his helm more hacked than Hector's, and how he looks,
and how he goes! O admirable youth! he ne'er saw
three and twenty. Go thy way, Troilus, go thy way!
Had I a sister were a grace, or a daughter a goddess,
he should take his choice. O admirable man! Paris?
Paris is dirt to him; and, I warrant, Helen, to
change, would give an eye to boot.
Asses, fools, dolts! chaff and bran, chaff and bran!
porridge after meat! I could live and die i' the
eyes of Troilus. Ne'er look, ne'er look: the eagles
are gone: crows and daws, crows and daws! I had
rather be such a man as Troilus than Agamemnon and
all Greece.
Achilles! a drayman, a porter, a very camel.
'Well, well!' why, have you any discretion? have
you any eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not
birth, beauty, good shape, discourse, manhood,
learning, gentleness, virtue, youth, liberality,
and such like, the spice and salt that season a man?
You are such a woman! one knows not at what ward you
lie.
Say one of your watches.
You are such another!
Where?
Good boy, tell him I come.
I doubt he be hurt. Fare ye well, good niece.
I'll be with you, niece, by and by.
Ay, a token from Troilus.
Friend, you! pray you, a word: do not you follow
the young Lord Paris?
You depend upon him, I mean?
You depend upon a noble gentleman; I must needs
praise him.
You know me, do you not?
Friend, know me better; I am the Lord Pandarus.
I do desire it.
Grace! not so, friend: honour and lordship are my titles.
What music is this?
Know you the musicians?
Who play they to?
At whose pleasure, friend
Command, I mean, friend.
Friend, we understand not one another: I am too
courtly and thou art too cunning. At whose request
do these men play?
Who, my cousin Cressida?
It should seem, fellow, that thou hast not seen the
Lady Cressida. I come to speak with Paris from the
Prince Troilus: I will make a complimental assault
upon him, for my business seethes.
Fair be to you, my lord, and to all this fair
company! fair desires, in all fair measure,
fairly guide them! especially to you, fair queen!
fair thoughts be your fair pillow!
You speak your fair pleasure, sweet queen. Fair
prince, here is good broken music.
Truly, lady, no.
Rude, in sooth; in good sooth, very rude.
I have business to my lord, dear queen. My lord,
will you vouchsafe me a word?
Well, sweet queen. you are pleasant with me. But,
marry, thus, my lord: my dear lord and most esteemed
friend, your brother Troilus,--
Go to, sweet queen, to go:--commends himself most
affectionately to you,--
Sweet queen, sweet queen! that's a sweet queen, i' faith.
Nay, that shall not serve your turn; that shall not,
in truth, la. Nay, I care not for such words; no,
no. And, my lord, he desires you, that if the king
call for him at supper, you will make his excuse.
What says my sweet queen, my very very sweet queen?
What says my sweet queen? My cousin will fall out
with you. You must not know where he sups.
No, no, no such matter; you are wide: come, your
disposer is sick.
Ay, good my lord. Why should you say Cressida? no,
your poor disposer's sick.
You spy! what do you spy? Come, give me an
instrument. Now, sweet queen.
My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have,
sweet queen.
He! no, she'll none of him; they two are twain.
Come, come, I'll hear no more of this; I'll sing
you a song now.
Ay, you may, you may.
Love! ay, that it shall, i' faith.
In good troth, it begins so.
Love, love, nothing but love, still more!
For, O, love's bow
Shoots buck and doe:
The shaft confounds,
Not that it wounds,
But tickles still the sore.
These lovers cry Oh! oh! they die!
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Doth turn oh! oh! to ha! ha! he!
So dying love lives still:
Oh! oh! a while, but ha! ha! ha!
Oh! oh! groans out for ha! ha! ha!
Heigh-ho!
Is this the generation of love? hot blood, hot
thoughts, and hot deeds? Why, they are vipers:
is love a generation of vipers? Sweet lord, who's
a-field to-day?
Not I, honey-sweet queen. I long to hear how they
sped to-day. You'll remember your brother's excuse?
Farewell, sweet queen.
I will, sweet queen.
How now! where's thy master? at my cousin
Cressida's?
O, here he comes.
How now, how now!
Have you seen my cousin?
Walk here i' the orchard, I'll bring her straight.
She's making her ready, she'll come straight: you
must be witty now. She does so blush, and fetches
her wind so short, as if she were frayed with a
sprite: I'll fetch her. It is the prettiest
villain: she fetches her breath as short as a
new-ta'en sparrow.
Come, come, what need you blush? shame's a baby.
Here she is now: swear the oaths now to her that
you have sworn to me. What, are you gone again?
you must be watched ere you be made tame, must you?
Come your ways, come your ways; an you draw backward,
we'll put you i' the fills. Why do you not speak to
her? Come, draw this curtain, and let's see your
picture. Alas the day, how loath you are to offend
daylight! an 'twere dark, you'ld close sooner.
So, so; rub on, and kiss the mistress. How now!
a kiss in fee-farm! build there, carpenter; the air
is sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere
I part you. The falcon as the tercel, for all the
ducks i' the river: go to, go to.
Words pay no debts, give her deeds: but she'll
bereave you o' the deeds too, if she call your
activity in question. What, billing again? Here's
'In witness whereof the parties interchangeably'--
Come in, come in: I'll go get a fire.
What, blushing still? have you not done talking yet?
I thank you for that: if my lord get a boy of you,
you'll give him me. Be true to my lord: if he
flinch, chide me for it.
Nay, I'll give my word for her too: our kindred,
though they be long ere they are wooed, they are
constant being won: they are burs, I can tell you;
they'll stick where they are thrown.
Pretty, i' faith.
Leave! an you take leave till to-morrow morning,--
Go to, a bargain made: seal it, seal it; I'll be the
witness. Here I hold your hand, here my cousin's.
If ever you prove false one to another, since I have
taken such pains to bring you together, let all
pitiful goers-between be called to the world's end
after my name; call them all Pandars; let all
constant men be Troiluses, all false women Cressids,
and all brokers-between Pandars! say, amen.
Amen. Whereupon I will show you a chamber with a
bed; which bed, because it shall not speak of your
pretty encounters, press it to death: away!
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here
Bed, chamber, Pandar to provide this gear!
How now, how now! how go maidenheads? Here, you
maid! where's my cousin Cressid?
To do what? to do what? let her say
what: what have I brought you to do?
Ha! ha! Alas, poor wretch! ah, poor capocchia!
hast not slept to-night? would he not, a naughty
man, let it sleep? a bugbear take him!
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beat
down the door? How now! what's the matter?
Who's there? my Lord AEneas! By my troth,
I knew you not: what news with you so early?
Here! what should he do here?
Is he here, say you? 'tis more than I know, I'll
be sworn: for my own part, I came in late. What
should he do here?
Is't possible? no sooner got but lost? The devil
take Antenor! the young prince will go mad: a
plague upon Antenor! I would they had broke 's neck!
Ah, ah!
Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above!
Prithee, get thee in: would thou hadst ne'er been
born! I knew thou wouldst be his death. O, poor
gentleman! A plague upon Antenor!
Thou must be gone, wench, thou must be gone; thou
art changed for Antenor: thou must to thy father,
and be gone from Troilus: 'twill be his death;
'twill be his bane; he cannot bear it.
Thou must.
Do, do.
Be moderate, be moderate.
Here, here, here he comes.
Ah, sweet ducks!
What a pair of spectacles is here!
Let me embrace too. 'O heart,' as the goodly saying is,
'--O heart, heavy heart,
Why sigh'st thou without breaking?
where he answers again,
'Because thou canst not ease thy smart
By friendship nor by speaking.'
There was never a truer rhyme. Let us cast away
nothing, for we may live to have need of such a
verse: we see it, we see it. How now, lambs?
Ay, ay, ay, ay; 'tis too plain a case.
Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or
my heart will be blown up by the root.
Do you hear, my lord? do you hear?
Here's a letter come from yond poor girl.
A whoreson tisick, a whoreson rascally tisick so
troubles me, and the foolish fortune of this girl;
and what one thing, what another, that I shall
leave you one o' these days: and I have a rheum
in mine eyes too, and such an ache in my bones
that, unless a man were cursed, I cannot tell what
to think on't. What says she there?
But hear you, hear you!
A goodly medicine for my aching bones! O world!
world! world! thus is the poor agent despised!
O traitors and bawds, how earnestly are you set
a-work, and how ill requited! why should our
endeavour be so loved and the performance so loathed?
what verse for it? what instance for it? Let me see:
Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing,
Till he hath lost his honey and his sting;
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your
painted cloths.
As many as be here of pander's hall,
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall;
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,
Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.
Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made:
It should be now, but that my fear is this,
Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss:
Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases,
And at that time bequeathe you my diseases.
