Hilloa, loa!
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the
sky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust
a bodkin's point.
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
how it takes up the shore! but that's not the
point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the
ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon
swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a
cork into a hogshead. And then for the
land-service, to see how the bear tore out his
shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said
his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned
it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the
sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared
and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than
the sea or weather.
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these
sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor
the bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at it
now.
I would you had been by the ship side, to have
helped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.
You're a made old man: if the sins of your youth
are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see
if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much
he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they
are hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll bury
it.
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod
yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred
shorn. what comes the wool to?
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am
I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound
of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,--what will
this sister of mine do with rice? But my father
hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it
on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for
the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good
ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but
one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to
horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden
pies; mace; dates?--none, that's out of my note;
nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I
may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
raisins o' the sun.
I' the name of me--
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay
on thee, rather than have these off.
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a
great matter.
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he
has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,
it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,
I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.
Alas, poor soul!
How now! canst stand?
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipped
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay
there; and yet it will no more but abide.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts
wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had
but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.
How do you now?
Shall I bring thee on the way?
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our
sheep-shearing.
Come on, strike up!
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up!
He could never come better; he shall come in. I
love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful
matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
indeed and sung lamentably.
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited
fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
You have of these pedlars, that have more in them
than you'ld think, sister.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take
no money of me; but being enthralled as I am, it
will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
Is there no manners left among maids? will they
wear their plackets where they should bear their
faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are
going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these
secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all
our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour
your tongues, and not a word more.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
and lost all my money?
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
What hast here? ballads?
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moe
ballads; we'll buy the other things anon.
Lay it by too: another.
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves: my
father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll
not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after
me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's
have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
See, see; what a man you are now!
There is no other way but to tell the king
she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
Nay, but hear me.
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh
and blood has not offended the king; and so your
flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show
those things you found about her, those secret
things, all but what she has with her: this being
done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you
could have been to him and then your blood had been
the dearer by I know how much an ounce.
Pray heartily he be at palace.
We are but plain fellows, sir.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you
had not taken yourself with the manner.
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say you
have none.
This cannot be but a great courtier.
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking
on's teeth.
Think you so, sir?
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an't
like you, sir?
He seems to be of great authority: close with him,
give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn
bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show
the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,
and no more ado. Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful
one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show
our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your
daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I
will give you as much as this old man does when the
business is performed, and remain, as he says, your
pawn till it be brought you.
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me
this other day, because I was no gentleman born.
See you these clothes? say you see them not and
think me still no gentleman born: you were best say
these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the
lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my
father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and
called me brother; and then the two kings called my
father brother; and then the prince my brother and
the princess my sister called my father father; and
so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like
tears that ever we shed.
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so
preposterous estate as we are.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou
art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and
franklins say it, I'll swear it.
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear
it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to
the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and
that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no
tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst
be a tall fellow of thy hands.
Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not
wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not
being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings
and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the
queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy
good masters.
