We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant
That we may be admitted where he is.
Tush!
Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate;
Talkers are no good doers: be assured
We come to use our hands and not our tongues.
We will, my noble lord.
Ho! who's here?
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.
Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well.
No; then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.
What, art thou afraid?
I thought thou hadst been resolute.
Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.
How dost thou feel thyself now?
Remember our reward, when the deed is done.
Where is thy conscience now?
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward,
thy conscience flies out.
How if it come to thee again?
'Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me
not to kill the duke.
Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me,
I warrant thee.
Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy
sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt
in the next room.
Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?
Offended us you have not, but the king.
What we will do, we do upon command.
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade
Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.
How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us,
When thou hast broke it in so dear degree?
Who made thee, then, a bloody minister,
When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault,
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
Ay, millstones; as be lesson'd us to weep.
Right,
As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself:
'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
Relent! 'tis cowardly and womanish.
Take that, and that: if all this will not do,
I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.
How now! what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not?
By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!
So do not I: go, coward as thou art.
Now must I hide his body in some hole,
Until the duke take order for his burial:
And when I have my meed, I must away;
For this will out, and here I must not stay.
