Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty
Will soon recover his accustom'd health.
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
Is it concluded that he shall be protector?
Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby?
To whom in all this presence speaks your grace?
She may, my lord, for--
What, marry, may she?
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king:
So should we you, if you should be our king.
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
And so doth mine: I muse why she's at liberty.
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
Madam, we will attend your grace.
By heaven, my heart is purged from grudging hate:
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!
Who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son: send straight for him
Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives:
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?
And so in me; and so, I think, in all:
Yet, since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged:
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
To-day shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
Richard the second here was hack'd to death;
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Richard. O, remember, God
To hear her prayers for them, as now for us
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace:
And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.
