Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
In manner and form following, sir; all those three:
I was seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with
her upon the form, and taken following her into the
park; which, put together, is in manner and form
following. Now, sir, for the manner,--it is the
manner of a man to speak to a woman: for the form,--
in some form.
As it shall follow in my correction: and God defend
the right!
Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
Not a word of Costard yet.
It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, in
telling true, but so.
Be to me and every man that dares not fight!
Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
Me?
Me?
Still me?
O, me!
With a wench.
Sir, I confess the wench.
I do confess much of the hearing it but little of
the marking of it.
I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a damsel.
This was no damsel, neither, sir; she was a virgin.
If it were, I deny her virginity: I was taken with a maid.
This maid will serve my turn, sir.
I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is, I was
taken with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true
girl; and therefore welcome the sour cup of
prosperity! Affliction may one day smile again; and
till then, sit thee down, sorrow!
Well, sir, I hope, when I do it, I shall do it on a
full stomach.
I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they
are but lightly rewarded.
Let me not be pent up, sir: I will fast, being loose.
Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation
that I have seen, some shall see.
Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.
It is not for prisoners to be too silent in their
words; and therefore I will say nothing: I thank
God I have as little patience as another man; and
therefore I can be quiet.
No enigma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the
mail, sir: O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain! no
l'envoy, no l'envoy; no salve, sir, but a plantain!
The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:
Let me see; a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
True, and I for a plantain: thus came your
argument in;
Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
And he ended the market.
Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that l'envoy:
I Costard, running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l'envoy,
some goose, in this.
True, true; and now you will be my purgation and let me loose.
My sweet ounce of man's flesh! my incony Jew!
Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration!
O, that's the Latin word for three farthings: three
farthings--remuneration.--'What's the price of this
inkle?'--'One penny.'--'No, I'll give you a
remuneration:' why, it carries it. Remuneration!
why, it is a fairer name than French crown. I will
never buy and sell out of this word.
Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man
buy for a remuneration?
Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
I thank your worship: God be wi' you!
When would you have it done, sir?
Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.
I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration,
a'leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! I
will do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration!
God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
The thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is truth.
An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.
I told you; my lord.
From my lord to my lady.
From my lord Biron, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.
By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it!
Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.
Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
She's too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her to bowl.
By my soul, a swain! a most simple clown!
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
O' my troth, most sweet jests! most incony
vulgar wit!
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it
were, so fit.
Armado o' th' one side,--O, a most dainty man!
To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
To see him kiss his hand! and how most sweetly a'
will swear!
And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit!
Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
Sola, sola!
Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.
Have with thee, my girl.
Some certain treason.
Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words.
I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word;
for thou art not so long by the head as
honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier
swallowed than a flap-dragon.
An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst
have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very
remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny
purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an
the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my
bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me!
Go to; thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers'
ends, as they say.
O Lord, sir, they would know
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
No, sir; but it is vara fine,
For every one pursents three.
Not so, sir; under correction, sir; I hope it is not so.
You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we know
what we know:
I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,--
Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living
by reckoning, sir.
O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors,
sir, will show whereuntil it doth amount: for mine
own part, I am, as they say, but to parfect one man
in one poor man, Pompion the Great, sir.
It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the
Great: for mine own part, I know not the degree of
the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.
We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take
some care.
I Pompey am,--
I Pompey am,--
I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big--
It is, 'Great,' sir:--
Pompey surnamed the Great;
That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make
my foe to sweat:
And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France,
If your ladyship would say, 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect: I
made a little fault in 'Great.'
Your servant, and Costard.
The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she
is two months on her way.
Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor
wench is cast away: she's quick; the child brags in
her belly already: tis yours.
Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is
quick by him and hanged for Pompey that is dead by
him.
I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man:
I'll slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you,
let me borrow my arms again.
I'll do it in my shirt.
