O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show
him our commission; talk no more.
What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?
When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till
the judgment-day.
The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind
of remorse in me.
Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be
damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.
So I am, to let him live.
I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour
will change; 'twas wont to hold me but while one
would tell twenty.
'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet
within me.
'Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.
In the Duke of Gloucester's purse.
Let it go; there's few or none will entertain it.
I'll not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it
makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it
accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it cheques him;
he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it
detects him: 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that
mutinies in a man's bosom; it fills one full of
obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold
that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it
is turned out of all towns and cities for a
dangerous thing; and every man that means to live
well endeavours to trust to himself and to live
without it.
Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he
would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his
reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?
O excellent devise! make a sop of him.
No, first let's reason with him.
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
A man, as you are.
Nor you, as we are, loyal.
My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.
Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.
And he that hath commanded is the king.
And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee,
For false forswearing and for murder too:
Thou didst receive the holy sacrament,
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.
Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee
From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.
What shall we do?
Look behind you, my lord.
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd!
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous guilty murder done!
I would he knew that I had saved his brother!
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;
For I repent me that the duke is slain.
